Thank you everyone again. Thank you so much everyone again for the participation. Thank you. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
And again I'd like to say welcome everyone. Very welcome. And again we continue teaching where we
started two years ago.
And this is the third year we're going to talk continuity of great teaching which is revealed by
the very famous Niyung Mathethung.
Niyung Mathethung, who came in the 19th century. And his revelation of teachings is called "Shire
Dorje Nombu" in Arabic.
And in the English we translated "Shout Vajra Awareness" teaching. So we continue following that.
Again to do teaching, always in the teaching mentioned as I think whenever you already know that to
re-stand in our motivation.
Motivation is so so important in the foundation. Everything. Motivation means mind. So we correct
the mind. Why do we need to correct the mind?
We have so many different conceptions, but the link to in our head and mind all the time that. And
most of the time is a regular samsaric mind.
That means duality mind, habajapateness, some of the connected with the emotions that. So those are
called samsara mind.
And with the greatest teacher Buddha often mentioned at the very beginning of time, cause of
suffering truth and suffering truth.
To truth, cause to truth. These negative emotions are the cause of suffering truth. It's very cause
.
Negative emotion is really the fundamental cause of samsara. When we have the negative emotion, we
are keeping the will of samsara.
Samsara is moving. Samsara is well maintained by these negative emotions. But when we practice dh
arma, when we reflect dharma, we are trying to reverse that habajapateness.
This habajapateness is so long time with us. According to Buddha's teaching, from the beginningless
times until now, there's no numbers.
And we have to reverse that. That's called practice. That's called following the path. Path truth.
And then bring the cessation truth or the realization, the enlightenment truth will bring.
So therefore, this correct motivation is really so important. This time correct motivation in the
teaching said truth motivations.
Generally Buddhism is the motivation and the vedayana motivation. Those are named vastness
motivation of the bodhicata.
And then skilpa means motivation of the vedayana teaching. Combine together. Also not two separate
things. Combine together.
Skilpa means the motivation of vedayana. Vedayana is based on the vastness motivation of the bodhic
ata.
They are combined. They are the same. But however, vastness motivation of the bodhicata is that we
all heard so many times.
You know, I know we heard from the teaching, we read the books, books, and the bodhicata.
It's kind of a comparison thought for all living beings, comparison thought without too many self-
important thoughts.
One of the mostly powerful obstacles for the bodhicata is self-important.
And the self-important motivation is the most powerful cause of the samsara.
The samsara that we keep in the samsara is self-important. And self-important we kind of extend a
little bit to what we call ego clinging.
Ego. Ego is self-important. That is not something that we think, "Oh, I'm so important."
But naturally there is self-important. We have the attitude of self-important and important of ours
.
Self and ours. And others less important. Others and all that goes.
So that is really the in the teaching said the most obstacles or the cause to obstacles for the
enlightenment of bodhicata and cause to maintain us in samsara.
So at this time we go to the teaching of the Vedic teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni,
particularly Mahayana teaching the vastness motivation of the bodhicata, really thinking of all
living beings.
Everyone has the same intentions, the same thought, the same more interesting, which means everyone
likes to be happy in joy and peace.
And everyone don't like really get suffering and sad and there's trouble with misfortunes. We're
saying motivation.
So yet we are not getting that. Exactly. We're not fulfilling. We're always struggling.
And therefore really we should, from the goal of our heart and mind, today I'm going to reflect the
teaching of the Buddha Shakyamuni,
particularly Mahayana teaching, made that benefit for all living beings from now until they reach
the enlightenment.
Kind of reaching, sensitive from the heart and the mind of that vastness motivation.
And then combined with those poor, immeasurable, poor, they can think of those all so wonderful.
Even one moment of the thinking of the immeasurable, those are the stretches, may all living beings
have the happiness and cause of happiness.
Sensitive thinking, one moment in the heart and the mind in the teaching said, it's so much power.
Also not just teaching said that, but many people experience it.
When you have the genuine loving kind of the compassion in your heart, it is really powerful.
Healing, it will heal the emotions. It removes the suffering.
It will heal the old diseases, sicknesses.
It prevents negative obstacles, handiness.
And in the teaching it will also have great protections.
All the immeasurable beings, divine, the gods will protect us when you have the love and compassion
truly in the heart.
That individually is the jewel light of the world.
All in the area, that is the universal righteousness to everyone, to one.
Because when they see, be the gods and dharma palace, when they see, really in the teaching they
protect.
There's many stories that when you have the true love and the true compassion in the heart and the
mind,
there are even the many wild animals that avoided them when they see that wild animals are coming
toward you,
to you sometimes. And when we have the genuine love and the compassion in the heart and the mind,
it's really in the teaching that is prevented.
There's many, many stories like that. So it's so powerful.
And it's all good with this bodhijatam, told.
And then in the Vedayana teaching often mentioned, then seeing everything as perfect mandalas.
Little mandala, mandala of the three kayas.
All the forms are the display of the nirmakaya mandalas.
All the sound systems are the mandala of the sambhukayas.
And the mind and the space are the mandala of the dharma kayas.
Reality really does all three are targeted.
It's not something three different objects in three different locations.
Within the dharma kayas, three other kayas are completed.
Within the nirmakaya, two other kayas are completed.
What means, I'm talking that, for example, within the nirmakaya state, there is sambhukaya
qualities.
There is dharma kayas qualities. Within the sambhukaya, there is also nirmakaya and dharma kayas.
So it's completely combined and targeted there.
And then in the teaching also, we explained a little bit that
all five aggregators are the five dhyana-buddhas, male-buddhas.
Five elements are five pimal-buddhas.
All the limbs of the prasikana, different emanations of the bodhisattvas,
those are in the teaching mentioned.
It's not just the teaching mentioned.
We don't see that right now because due to the cataracts of the duality mind,
we don't see that.
But reality really is everything in that status.
That's why naturally this universe in the world is the mandala of the deities.
Pure land, that means it's pure land.
That means this universe is pure land.
When you have the realization, this is not something that pure land have to go far away.
Pure land, we have to be removed.
Our duality, this negative obscuration when we are removed,
our duality removed, pure land is right here according to the technique
because all five aggregators are the five dhyana-buddhas, male-buddhas.
Five elements are the pimal-buddhas.
Reality, they are also in the union.
That's what is involved in teaching so many unions.
This is not just the union of the emotions.
This is the union of the divine mandala, naturally as it is.
The union and totally great blessfulness.
That means no tendence of sufferings.
Suffering the sadness is caused by the dualities.
When duality is preached, everything is transformed.
Everything is really in the, according to the teaching or those who regard realization,
is totally blessfulness.
Perfectly blessfulness.
Beautifully.
That is in status.
Status.
So, in the way we are teaching, we can both each other thought, activating those.
We try to, because we like, that is our goal, to discover our inner nature of the enlightenment.
So we can't really both each other thought and discover, have those beautiful motivations.
Those are known as vastness motivation of the bodhicitta.
Oh, sorry.
Those are the skillful means of motivation of the Vedayana teaching.
So vastness motivation of the bodhicitta, what that vastness means.
Because sentient beings, living beings are vastness.
There is no numbers.
And to reach to all living beings, our bodhicitta has no boundaries.
It's vastness.
Therefore vastness motivation of the bodhicitta, vastness.
When we had vastness motivation of bodhicitta to vastness all the sentient beings,
what it has in the teaching is that it has vastness benefits, powerful benefits.
It purifies obscurations, negativities.
Those obscurations, when many times the teaching means emotion obscurations, knowledge obscurations
,
those are really removed.
Cleared purify, gradually according our degree of the bodhicitta and understanding.
And at the same time, what is happening, not just the cleansing purify,
but we are discover in the inner college our treasure of the mind.
A treasure of the mind, of wisdom, chaos, joy, happiness, peace, courage, commitment.
Those are all shining so beautifully.
Those are known as, also, meaning the marriages, to marriages that we heard so many times.
So this is what really is all.
So those, therefore, this motivation is so important.
And for those reasons in the teaching, what the gracious teacher Buddha said,
every time when he gives the teaching, you listen, listen perfectly, lokanyuna,
and listen perfectly, and keep that in the mind, then I will give you the teaching.
That's it.
Listen carefully, in a little bit, lokanyuna, ila, sondhe, ne chula, sheto.
That's the in a little bit about I'm roughly an athlete.
Listen perfectly and keep in the heart and the mind.
What that actually means, I said,
with those beautiful motivation, don't listen, reflect teaching with emotions,
with joy and appreciation.
Joy and appreciation and respect.
And then also keep that in the heart.
Not just let it come from one ear, right ear, and go through the left ear.
Left ear, go away.
Passing through, no.
Hold that to the heart.
Then what gracious teacher said, then I will teach you.
That is almost, you read, if the 84,000 teachings now translated at the very beginning time,
almost everyone has that.
That, lokanyuna, ila, sondhe, ne chula, sheto.
Those are also mentioned in what's called words, my perfect teacher translated.
Those are translated.
There is errors of the three mistakes when you are listening.
Awarded three mistakes, awarded that.
And then also, three errors of the whistles, double, not W.
We, maybe I just translated the whistle instead.
Three errors of the ports, P-O-T, ports.
And then six stains.
Six stains.
Awarded those.
You can, since now this book is translated and you look those.
That is what gracious teacher, Buddha, mentioned.
Listen carefully, that's the condensate.
Listen carefully and keep that in the heart and I will teach you.
So those are the related teaching mentioned.
So those are.
And now we do the beautiful motivation.
Now we go to the text itself.
Many of you already have that.
And this text has like eight sections, eight different chapters.
Some are a little longer and some are shorter.
And the text we translated, I mean, is a bit of target help to translate this.
From the next of the pure appearance and the pre-module of wisdom,
the pre-module of experience of the summoned body,
the spontaneous accompanied schedule of the dukkim,
the sharp weather of the awareness of the contents of the great sacred mantrayanas.
It's a new book, so not everybody knows.
You don't have any?
Not everybody knows.
Okay.
So if you don't, I think we have available in the technological levels
and get that if you don't have that.
And I'm going to follow pretty much trying to follow with these texts.
Look, this is translated, looking at these texts
and then go through this as much as I can.
That's what I did before and this is my plan.
So every you can get that through technology level, please get that.
And then also, we have the ability to do it.
You want that, of course, you can get that.
This was for technology or the e-book, no?
E-book.
E-books.
You can get e-books through that, which is then that.
But either way, okay.
So we look, but this text has, like, about the ad that you see,
ad sections, ad different sections.
And we went through third one.
Last few years, we went through until third section.
The first one is in the title or the concluding section in the teaching said,
is explaining about the taking mind as part.
Taking mind as part.
Second is establishing or the beholdering the Vipassana inside.
And the third one is establishing the Dharmakaya foundations.
Those are the concluding ending of the text.
Each time in this teaching mentioned, you see them.
If you have booked that, three things.
So firstly, if I use that best and use it as a simple way to explain more
about mind and about the shamatha meditation.
Of course, it has, I'm saying it's not all.
Because this Dokkien teaching is really best on every time.
It's all going to the nature of the mind and to the point.
Mind is mostly important to everything in Buddhism.
Because mind is the jewel of everything.
Even though we don't detect the mind, even though we don't see the mind,
we all have the mind.
Mind is direct as every hour movement of the physically, verbally.
And then, of course, mind itself.
So that means if I talk at a larger level, mind is training,
mind is leading and leading our old samsara activities.
Samsara is, mind is keeping, mind is directing to ourselves.
And all our nirvana process, or the enlightenment process,
is directing and maintaining, activating by our mind.
Therefore, mind is drooling everything.
In Dokkien teaching, mind second teaching,
used in the metaphor, king of all creation, or king of creation.
Mind is a king, creating everything.
That's the Buddhist philosophy, Buddha's teaching.
Buddha's teaching, everything, our, so that means in a small level,
joy, for example, in the contemporary level,
our joy is created by the mind.
Our happiness is created by the mind.
Our sadness is created by the mind.
Our melancholy is created by the mind.
Mind is everything.
Even though maybe we see somebody calls me to death,
but that's in Buddhism, conditions, the very cause is our mind.
Conditions, without a cause, condition alone cannot produce, produce.
That we know, we know in the logic level,
or in the simple farmers' technology or skills,
just cause alone can produce, need conditions.
Conditions alone cannot do, need cause.
Fundamental cause is the mind.
For that reason, gracious teacher of Buddha said,
"Simple, why the teaching?"
"Tame your mind."
This is my teaching of Buddha teaching.
Who will tame your mind?
Nobody else will tame our mind.
Be practical, not carried by with the force of the kind of rumor
or something, or somebody will do that.
No.
We have truth.
Each individual has 100% capabilities to tame our own mind.
For that, even Buddhists cannot tame our mind.
For that reason, gracious teacher of Buddha said,
"I showed you the path.
Now is your turn."
To put that or not.
Buddha is a great teacher.
Teacher.
Teacher shows the teachings, how to do,
but we have to apply.
So mind is everything.
And for that, in the beginning time,
in his post this section of teaching,
he is explaining a little more, emphasizing of the mind
and samatha meditation.
We connect meditation with the mind.
Samatha meditation, which is so important.
But at the same time, this is zokki teaching.
I like the zokki teaching.
It has all zokki teachings as well as all the other teachings.
That inattentor means other teachings,
inattentor such as mahayoga teaching,
anayoga teaching, atayoga teaching.
Teaching. True. True.
And then the second one,
explained here in the concluding section,
it said highlight, is then the rebhayana explained.
Rebhayana is then the zokki actually.
Rebhayana means seeing the nature of the mind.
See the nature as it is.
What nature of the mind is, then,
is in a simple way to tell, is emptiness.
There is nothing to hold anything.
We must get analyzed, even though we all have the mind.
But every, I ask to myself, where is my mind?
What answer we have?
What do we find?
Even you are looking.
Look into that.
That's what in the greatest teacher,
Buddha Shakyamana is teaching, all those all great masters,
emptiness.
There is nothing to really explain, to comment.
That openness, that vastness.
This.
And yet it contains all the qualities,
all the qualities, what that means, the qualities.
All the good side of the,
nirvana call it, enlightenment call it,
this emptiness mind.
All the samsara call it, all is with mind.
Again, I'm trying to precisely let you more clear that.
You all know that.
But I've said, what is samsara call it?
Angay is with mind.
Attachment is with mind.
And jealousy is with mind.
Ignorant is with mind.
Arrogant is with mind.
It's not anywhere else.
It's with mind, with mind.
Where that is, it shall again.
Don't find.
Can't say anything.
Not just only the all nirvana call it,
joy, peace, devotion, bodhicata,
courage, commitment, joy of effort.
And call it with six paramatas.
All that is with mind.
Is truth true?
It's not just stories.
It's not just myth.
Really.
This is what's true.
True.
So therefore, seeing this,
seeing the nature of the mind,
seeing the reality past, F-A-C-E,
past of the mind is insight.
In it a bit, long tone.
And we all we pass on.
You've seen the past of nature.
Past of the nature of the mind,
or past of the mind,
reality past of mind.
Listen to me.
When we don't even think of that mind,
about that, we presume we have mind.
Someone inside, somewhere in the brain,
or heart, or wherever, something.
But if we're trying to really look,
investigate, shout, wager,
ever not, investigate that.
Trying to find out.
There's no space.
No sport.
Any sport that you can see.
So see nature exactly as it is.
We pass on.
That.
Seeing the emptiness, openness of that.
And that is the second,
second kind of highlight teaching
as I'm following with the gracious teacher,
teacher Dunyul-Lunga himself in his teaching,
highlight that.
Highlight that.
And third one is discovering a third section,
or third chapter of use.
Use a third section that is
discovering the Dharmakaya.
Dharmakaya nature.
So now, what is the difference
between Vipassana and Dharmakayas?
Basically, they really the same Dharmakaya.
But Dharmakaya, when we're explaining,
it has qualities.
Vipassana means emptiness.
Discover the emptiness.
That's empty.
But Dharmakaya, when you talk,
it has, call it with emptiness.
It has vitality with that emptiness.
And it has all the potentials with that emptiness.
All the potentials.
What are vitality?
What are the potentials?
I'm using those terminologies
because that emptiness of the highest,
all the qualities, as I said,
samsara qualities, nirvana qualities,
really to activate it.
All the qualities, if I use another word,
all the richness of samsara and samsara mind,
and all the richness of the quality of the nirvana,
all is in the mind.
When we discover that qualities,
then it's Dharmakaya.
In the Buddha teaching, what did he say?
I mean, Dharmakaya, nature has what?
Ten powers.
Fulfillness.
Fulfilllessness.
And 18 extra ordinary qualities.
Eighteen extra ordinary qualities.
Those are the main, those are.
All that within this emptiness mind,
that is Dharmakaya.
Dharmakaya is the source of sambhokaya,
source of nirmakaya, where that arises.
So, if it's simple, if you would tell,
all the sambhokaya qualities within the Dharmakaya
and all the nirmakaya qualities
and the richness are in the Dharmakaya.
Kaya. Kaya.
So, exploring that qualities
is then the discovering Dharmakaya,
that third section.
And again, of course, that highlight ending
by the new lung was there,
but it also explain all the other techniques and things.
When you look to that third section,
we went through last year too, through those things,
all the different techniques too.
So, that is what we went through there.
And this year, now we begin the fourth one.
The fourth one.
And here, the fourth one is what starts later here.
Here.
And on a certain,
on extending the intrinsic characteristics
of the excellent qualities of the ground,
excellent quality.
This is, then in the teaching said,
it is explaining about the Dharmakaya qualities,
Dharmakaya and all Dokkin, Dokkin teachings.
So, now we're going to the Dokkin teachings.
And now, that begins with here,
so now we go here, which is here.
And this is, of course, you all know,
the new lung farm who came, I think was born as 19, not 19.
1835, I think, 1835,
and entered the Mahabharata in Nirvana, 19 of home, I think.
19 of home.
And he was one of the great thetums
in the 19th century, in the 19th century.
And one of the great thetums and the crazy western masters.
And Sabantenin understood all the teachings,
teaching so many great regions
and able to see all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in light beings.
And like Guru, Deva, and Dokkinis,
and Dokkinis, really, just amazing, sparkly.
And then his discovery teaching is also known as,
generally in the Newmarch school.
You all know, many of you already know,
few of you maybe you don't know that.
In the Newmarch school, generally, we talk a little bit about that,
that as, in general, it is all Buddha teaching.
This is the Buddha Shakyamuni Gauta Enlightenment, age 35,
and then that year, 49 days,
after Buddha's Mahabharata, sorry, Enlightenment,
and he started giving the teachings, one after another.
Those are the three turning well of dharma.
Those are three turning well of dharma.
First turning well of dharma,
second turning well of dharma,
and third turning well of dharma.
And those are all known as, and put as teaching.
And now, in the end of the day,
it's oscillated in the 8th century,
the time of the Gautapima Sambho,
the great Kintaso, Disney, and the great master.
Shandaraki, at that time, so many great oscillators
eliminated, translated teaching,
and those are known, that time started.
Most of it oscillated, there's over 100 volumes,
most of that oscillated at that time.
Those are known as the Kanjals.
Kanjals.
And the same time they translated,
so many commentaries on those Buddha teachings
by such many great masters,
masters such as Nagarjuna, Asenga, Vasubendu,
Narmakitti, I mean, all those great,
and Shandaraki, the teaching,
that is called the Kanjals, those days.
So Kanjals and Kanjals.
And then in Nirma schools,
it's very Buddhist, and in Tibetan days,
the poor schools are very major poor schools,
poor days, and many other schools too.
But poor schools are the Nirma,
and Gaju, Satya, and Agela, those schools.
And the Nirma teachings are then continually preserved,
that at the same time teaching what taught,
taught in the Baidang Europe,
and some of the great masters, Shandaraki,
and Bhagavamata, so forth,
continually maintained, maintained those teachings,
known as Kama teachings, or Nirma Kama teachings.
And then also there is called the Thelma teachings.
Thelma, that is the Thelma,
that is hidden by the Gurba and Sambhava,
assisted by the Vastra of Dakini, Shinshoja,
as well as many other great, those masters,
hidden, rediscovered, those are known as the Thelma teachings.
If I translated that in the English,
is the Kama in the Thelma.
Kama means order-class, lineage teachings,
and the Thelma means hidden, rediscovered teachings.
And why is it hidden in the teaching itself?
In the Buddha's teaching too,
and to award the missing the teaching
to protect the teaching,
and then it's good to hide those teachings
on the rocks, the mountains, and the waters,
or whatever it is, to prevent not loss of teaching,
and at the same time, then they will reveal again.
And as the many teachings are hidden that way
and discovered by many great Thelma,
those are known as thelma teachings.
Within thelma teachings,
there is also another teaching called
pure Vigin lineage, pure Vigins, pure Vigins.
And that is, again, in the teaching mentioned,
and the Vigins are, for example,
known as the Vigin teaching,
as well as Mind Thelma teachings.
And that is, in the teaching said,
in the 8th century, Vibhama Sambharva,
and the Shinshoja hidden those teachings,
so entrusted that teaching in the heart of those
then highly relaxed beings, such as those 25 disciples,
one of the 25 disciples in the heart and the mind,
entrusted that.
So that means, from the mind to mind of the Mihielini,
and entrusted in the heart and the mind of those great beings.
And Gaurabha and Sambharva, and mentioned,
or together with the Shinshoja,
you will revere this teaching at such and such time
in the future when there is needed that.
This was a different time era, you will revere,
and then you will revere again that.
And that is, for example, his only Dnununmi teaching.
Many are.
And Dnununmi language teaching.
And then, as well as Nnunmi language teaching,
those are like the three Mind Thelma, many.
And then there is pure Vigin Thelma teaching.
Those are highly enlightened beings, such as those,
such as Dnununmi and Nnunmi language.
I mean, all these great masters, they had pure Vigin,
and such as also Namchim, Majordodgim.
Very famous in my Tethom.
The Buddha appears right in front of them.
Them and give the teaching.
Teaching, and then they are transcribed there
on a certain time of practice by themselves,
and transcribed that.
So those are known as pure Vigin Thelma.
And this teaching, Dnununmi language teaching,
is pure Vigin teaching.
But as well as also it is really from his worst mind.
He transformed, he transformed himself
as like Vajradhara or the Buddha, some of the Buddha himself.
In that state, he explored these teachings,
teaching subcontainers, subcontainers.
So it is, in a way, pure Vigin teaching
because it's mentioned.
The illusion net of the wisdom,
the wisdom illusion net of the pure Vigin.
That's what he said.
The way a paid teaching is not something pure Vigin,
but subcontainers arise from his sharp weather awareness
or from his primordial wisdom.
Primordial wisdom is transformed
as the Buddha summoned the Buddha or the Vedas, Dara, Dara,
along with the Sambhava,
and then expound these teachings, teachings.
So that's how it is, how this teaching came.
And now, in that teaching,
and now today is the fourth one we go.
That is the essential nature of all the apparent existence, emptiness.
Great emptiness is subcontainers actualized
as the essentials of the path.
I have a little bit something.
So this is what I said here.
This, this has, in here a little bit,
each has descriptions of the kind of, highlighted each description.
I have this commentary by one of his disciples,
Pimatrashi, and his commentaries following that,
which is, I think, translated into English, too.
I think maybe whenever you have that.
This is called post-identifying of the foundation,
foundation, foundation, foundation.
Yeah, that's it.
Foundations, so this is the highlight, real explanation,
of, highlight the post of the foundations,
and then going to Gomu, details that.
And now, that is, I read already,
is essence of Dharmakai is, is Sungata.
What is that?
Oh, no, no, here.
Here, here.
So that is really explained.
Esenical nature, the brain exists in the emptiness.
Great emptiness, the spontaneous, actualized essence of the path,
path, the spontaneous, so that is the kind of highlight
of the really, really pointing out about the ground, ground that.
And what it truly means, ground, ground, ground is the ground of the,
ground and the source of samsara and nirvana.
Samsara has source, nirvana has source.
And, you know, also in the teaching, many times you mentioned,
kundi, lamsam in it a bit.
Kola means samsara, debah means nirvana,
lam means path, path to the nirvana.
Everything what we see here in the universe and world
or in the samsara and nirvana can summarize in this three terminology of three.
Samsara and the nirvana and path to the nirvana.
Or samsara, path to the nirvana and the nirvana itself.
So that is, that all has source.
What is that source?
Here is in the brilliant explaining of the emptiness.
Emptiness is the source of everything.
And that is generally, you know, in the Buddha teaching,
there is true truth, generally true explaining.
And the relative truth and the absolute truth.
These are true truths.
Relative truth, exactly things what we see here.
Good, bad, existing, fire, water, everything is relative.
It's all existing and it is there, is here.
We cannot ignore that.
That is relative.
But nature of everything what we see is in the teaching mentioned,
the emptiness.
That is known as in the true truth level, absolute truth.
So relative truth and absolute truth.
So relative truth.
Relative truth is everything what we say is all relative.
But the nature of the relative truth,
or even though relative truth,
how that is in the debate is called kundab.
The debate about relative truth is kundu ji dema.
Ku means all.
Dhamma is every translated that, illusion.
And the truth is truth.
Dema means truth, sorry.
So relative truth is in the debate about all illusion truth.
All illusion truth.
What that means actually is that even though they appeared,
they are not really solid, existing, as weakling.
They are like bubble.
That's why the greatest teacher of Buddha used the example.
Bubble, mirage, reflection of the moon in the water, dream,
and the double images.
Images, it's all like that.
This is not something solid existed.
Therefore, illusion.
But then is the truth.
Why it's called truth?
Because it's functioning exactly as it is on the relative level.
It's doing the job.
Therefore, it's the truth.
It's just because the truth is not some solid existing truth,
but it's functioning.
It's performing the duty it is activating.
It is.
That's called relative truth.
The absolute truth is that nature of this relative truth is absolute truth.
That absolute truth is emptiness.
Nature is emptiness.
Nothing is solid existing.
It's empty.
That is explaining more in later years, so we can talk more.
But it is really beyond anything that you can hold.
It's totally, totally evaporating.
It's empty.
The emptiness of quality is why it's called in Tibet, again,
ton dham demba, ton dhamba demba, three words.
Ton dhamba demba.
That if we translate it roughly that ultimate supreme truth,
supreme, a roughly translation, ultimate supreme truth
or supreme meaning, meaning truth.
Because this is nothing, never going to change.
This emptiness or this absolute truth is never going to change.
It is beyond the changing, beyond any publications.
It is always maintained as it is.
For that reason, in the teaching we've heard so many times,
whether Buddha comes to give the teaching on that is nothing changed.
When Buddha does not come to give the teaching on that absolute truth, nothing changed.
Whether we are in samsara, it didn't change anything.
Whether we are in nirvana, it did not change anything.
Nature remains as it is.
Therefore, it is called absolute truth or ton dhamba demba.
But this one here, explaining, is the J and L, the foundation,
the absolute truth, all the nature.
What that is, actually, with kind of like more highlighting point,
that is our nature of the mind.
Our nature of the mind is source of our samsara and our nirvana.
Our nirvana, one's own samsara comes from our mind.
One's own nirvana comes from our mind.
It's not coming from anywhere.
Anywhere, it is really the mind.
Mind, it is.
How is this nature of the mind is?
Then, in the natural level, is emptiness.
Nature is emptiness, nature of mind.
This name is also known as tathanga dangarbha.
The Buddha nature is emptiness.
In the Dokki teaching, many times highlight that,
that nature of the mind is emptiness.
That is dharmakaya.
It has all the beautiful other qualities,
such as sambokaya and namakaya.
Namakaya.
This emptiness is an emptiness of many seno names.
Emptiness, and also in another seno name, is dharmadhatu.
Dharmadhatu, emptiness, ultimate nature,
true nature as it is, true nature in the Tibetan world,
Tibetan world, world, such as tungvani, yan taupeng tau,
tau, nyung mau, mau.
Those are all the seno names of this emptiness,
explaining of the emptiness aspect,
the openness aspect of nature.
Yet everything comes from this emptiness mind.
As I said, aliens, aliens said that, that's all, that.
And then if I, so that means everything is an emptiness status.
All is emptiness.
That is the highlight of the absolute truth.
And, or maybe you can translate it,
everything what you see in the universe and the world,
everything what, nature is the emptiness.
Nature is a dharmadhatu.
Nature is in the dharmakaya status.
Everything is in that status.
Essence of nature, all is emptiness.
That great emptiness is then the foundation head.
Great emptiness is the foundation.
Foundation, source of everything.
That is grown.
And this also explain in my understanding,
my understanding is explaining of the,
in the teaching of the mentioned.
Growned, part, and the result.
In it read, it's called jai lam deva, deva.
So this, from here, from the essence and nature
of the appearance existence is great emptiness.
That is grown, foundation.
Foundation again as I said many times.
Foundation of samsara, foundation of nirvana,
foundation of everything, that is.
Now when you see the nature exactly as it is,
now we're going to apply that to as part.
Then explaining of the part.
Part is not the part outside we follow,
somewhere kind of outside.
Our part is to our spiritual enlightenment journey
as we practice and meditate.
That is part.
Part.
When we continue to practice and meditate in the part,
and what is going to actualize?
The result.
That is then subcontinent actualized.
Subcontinent actualized.
That is a result.
So this first line is really explaining
of the growned part and result.
Have I used another terminology in the Dokki teachings?
Growned zokchen, part zokchen, and result zokchen.
Those are used and explain later to you more here.
So this is the highlight of the breathing.
This is great emptiness or great our nature of the mind.
It contains, it is as it contains the ground or the foundation.
It contains the part, it contains the result.
All is within one single state of our nature of the mind.
Growned is in our mind, of the samsara and the rana,
and part of the enlightenment is in our mind,
and achievement is in our mind.
So that means all the everything in the Tibetan world,
zhi, lam, devo, all that three within our nature of the mind.
Mind.
That is highlight, highlight that, that.
Highlight this, this.
And with this, and now we go.
The next one is then in the...
And now the next one is when you look to the page,
again it's according to this booklet page, page nenden, nenden,
and it's not little bit more detail explaining, explaining more detail.
Now, and...
So this is now, again I read is in English translation,
the essence, the dharma kaya, the sukata garba.
Garba is not adornated or changed by the samsara and the rana,
free from the conceptualized extreme.
It is endowed with the three gates of the liberation.
So this is explaining about this, the ground.
And the ground is, as I said earlier, is a tathanga than garba.
And tathanga than garba is, this has many names,
the ground has many names.
Tathanga than garba.
And Buddha nature.
And then also, and the clay light luminous the mind.
And Ussar vayishi.
And as well as the original mind.
Mind.
And Ussar vayishi.
Yeah, Ussar vayishi.
And then as well as the salt-boned awareness.
So those all is really referring to the, to this tathanga than garba.
Tathanga than garba is generally Buddha teaching in Mahayana, Sutra.
I mentioned that is most of the time terminology used as tathanga than garba.
Ote, vishyapanyam, for essence of the tathanga.
Garba, essence of the Buddha nature.
Those are used then.
So this is actually teaching on our nature of the mind now.
And now this dharmakaya nature is, is tathanga than garba.
And which is, is our mind, nature of the mind is never really changing.
And the teaching said, from the beginning of this time,
until now it remained exactly as it was.
It was.
Nothing really changed.
It's continually, continually the same.
It has all the qualities of the Buddhas in life beings.
Everything is within this nature, nature, nature.
And, and it's never going to change anything that.
So this nature is, is the essence of dharmakaya is, I think,
make it the elite, elite is true so many times.
That the essence of dharmakamaya is, so that the garba is,
cannot change by any samsara and nirvana thing.
And when it reached enlightenment, it didn't become any better than that.
Better.
And when we are in samsara, it becomes, then it got worse.
Exactly, just really remained the same, same as it was.
Always, same thing.
Nothing changed.
How is this?
This is again, a great mass, Lunkimba said, maybe said this, this way,
that this old and natural is like as a sun and sky,
brilliant, clay and unimpeded, open status.
That, but then it is covered by the, the temporarily arising.
And that old and natural is covered by the closeness of the duality
of consumption.
Consumption is completely covered that.
But reality, nature is nothing changed.
That means nature of the sky, nature of the sun.
Sun, billion, sun called it, never really changed all the time.
Even though it is thick clothes, in the covered completely or that,
the nature is remained perfectly, beautifully as it is.
So that is, and this call it is, how it is.
Then, preform all the complexities, here it says,
this is the, never can change by any means.
And the preform the old concept like extremes
is endowed with the three guts of the liberations.
So old, preform the old, consumption life.
And that means the consumption is the preform of all the existing,
non-existing, neither and eithers.
Also this nature is, is totally preformed at aspects.
Those the great master Nagarjuna said, as we joined,
and this absolute interdependent co-ordination nature is preformed
to see, and preform the seizing, and preform the birth.
And preform the nihilism,
or temple, or extension,
and preform the eternalism or permanent,
and preform the coming, preform the going,
is not neither one nor many.
Those are the at aspects of the great master Nagarjuna said,
the nature of the interdependent co-ordination.
What that actually means, interdependent co-ordination,
that because the tathangada nay, kathangada nagarbha,
is nature of the interdependent co-ordination.
Interdependent co-ordination means a rising display.
Interdependent co-ordination means the tathangada has all the power,
tathangada nagarbha, our nature of the,
nature of the mind has all power to arising.
Every display, every display of the conceptions arising,
without any shortages, is arising.
Moment is arising, that moment is never lost in nature.
Emptiness is kept continuing.
That is how it is.
For that reason, the great master Nagarjuna said,
"App is the emptiness that is interdependent."
App is interdependent, that is emptiness.
Interdependent and the emptiness are the same nature.
So when you have the realization of the true nature,
exactly of the understanding of this perfect nature,
in that natural level, this interdependent arising energy
is free from all the other aspects.
There is nothing really source,
source in exactly the pinpoint location.
Even we can see all arising from the dharma dhatu,
all arising from the tathangada nagarbha,
but where is arising?
We are trying to pinpoint a scientific way.
Also, by trying to pinpoint, there is nothing really.
It is true.
True.
So for that reason, it is free from all the 'S' aspects.
'S' aspects.
And then, if you say the 'S' aspect or the simple way,
then it is free from the poor extremes.
Existing, non-existing, neither, neither.
That's how this nature it is.
But yet, yet, it is free from all that nature.
And then, same time, this is.
Then liberated three doors.
Liberated three doors, what is that?
Explaining about, again, nature of the emptiness,
nature of this call of the tathangada dharma.
Nature is free from three doors.
And then, we use the metaphor in the Buddha's teacher,
the great teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni's teaching,
'Door of the Enlightenment'. Three doors.
When you have this realization,
the cause is emptiness when you have the realization.
That itself is the 'Door of the Enlightenment'.
The result is the emptiness if we realize that,
that is also the 'Door of the Enlightenment'.
Nature of the both cause and result are free from the identity or the emptiness.
That is the 'Door of the Enlightenment'.
It's called three doors of the liberation.
All that is, in a minute time, the practice of the lineage is applied to the mind.
So not point externally, kind of, tripping point to exactly the whole side.
Mind is free from the three doors of liberation.
We look the past mind, where the past mind comes from.
That is cause. Mind is free from the cause.
Cause. So free from the cause.
Where you look, think about where mind went going there.
Where we're going to go.
It's not just the nation. You can't point anything.
It's free from the result, going free from again.
And when you look the present mind, there is no mind, free from the identity.
When you discover that free, free from, that is the 'Door of the Enlightenment'.
Because it is eliminating and softening our attachment, grasping, clinging.
There is nothing to report, really. Mind is.
And for that reason, the greatest teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, said in the, what's called,
'Rena kurta sutra'. It's called the 'Kontyutapam'.
'Kontyutapam' though, in the Tibetan 'Kontyutapam' in Sanskrit 'Rena kutra'.
And in the English maybe.
And erected, erected, built up, built up the jewels 'Sutra'.
'Sutra' is a very famous 'Sutras'.
It's a whole group of, there's many volumes of the teaching.
And there's one of the teaching is having discussions.
Like dialogue with the Buddha, with the Maha Kashyapas, or 'Kashyapa'.
Buddha said, 'Kashyapa'.
'Kashyapa' mind is free from the 'Pocal Point'.
'Pocal Point'.
When you don't have the mind, when you don't have the 'Pocal Point' mind.
So that means, seen in the Tibetan, seen 'Mukwate', the 'Devas'.
But there's nothing to 'Pocus'.
Mind is free from 'Mukwate' 'Deva'.
One way is free from the 'Pocus'.
'Pocus' or free from 'Pocal Point'.
That mind is not, that is free from past.
That is free from future.
That is free from the present.
That is free from any time.
Mind is free from.
Again, three times is 'Pocal Point'.
No, mind as when you don't have any 'Pocal Point'.
Point, that 'Pocal Point' object is free from the three times.
From the past, present and the future.
And as I said here, the three doors of liberation in practice.
Pointing out the nature of the mind teaching.
Always point, three doors of liberation to the mind.
And mind is free from all that existence.
So that means, 'atang gatang garba' is free from the three times.
'Buddha' nature is free from the three times.
It's olden and natural qualities.
And therefore, it is indestructible, uncharitable.
And for those reasons, as any teacher said,
it is beyond, it is great permanent, beyond permanent, impermanent.
It is great purity, is beyond of the dirty and the cleans.
And the great supreme, supreme is beyond existing and non-existing.
Six things.
And it is great blasphemous beyond emotion, blissfulness and sufferings.
It's old and natural qualities.
That is what 'atang gatang garba' is.
And that is how it is.
So this is, again, 'atang gatang garba' has explaining.
So this has two qualities, 'brily'.
The collator of the emptiness, collator of the clarity.
And the Dokhi teaching often mentions
that the nature of the mind is embodiment of three kayas.
The emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind is dharma kaya.
Clarity aspect of the nature of the mind is sambhokaya.
The union of the clarity and the emptiness is the dharma kaya.
So these explain of these.
This essence of dharma kaya, sogang garba,
is adult net and changeless from the samsara and nirvana
and free from all the complex cities
and free from the full three liberation,
is highlight of the nature of the emptiness of the dharma kaya.
Dharma kaya is free from the emptiness aspect.
So all is empty.
That is integration teacher,
Buddha Shakyamuni's teaching,
all the second turning wheel of dharma,
which is known as the Pandya Paramata teaching,
is highlighting all time.
The emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind,
that rejoined also in the heart of the sadhara too.
Poem is emptiness.
Emptiness is form or that all in no eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue.
All that highlight of that negation away
is highlight of the emptiness aspect of the dharma kaya,
dharma kaya, or emptiness aspect of the tathanga dangarba aspect.
So in that level, in the teaching stage,
from the poem, F-O-R-M, from the poem,
all the way to the enlightenment,
there is nothing existing solid.
All is emptiness.
From the poem aggregate, all the way to the enlightenment.
Enlightenment.
Always from the samsara to all the way nirvana,
there is nothing substantial, solid, existing at all.
At all is like teachings of the Absolute Truth, dharma kaya,
the emptiness aspect of dharma kaya, dharma dhatu or dharma kaya.
All the tathanga dangarba's synonym is dharma dhatu.
Dharma dhatu is tathanga, also synonym.
That great, great master Nagarjuna said in his praise to the dharma dhatu,
praise to the dharma dhatu if you look that.
And in what he said in that,
one who does not understand the nature of the dharma dhatu,
they are wandering in the samsara.
One who saw the nature of dharma dhatu,
that itself is nirvana enlightenment.
I pay homage to that dharma dhatu.
That's the great master Nagarjuna said.
Dharma dhatu is tathanga dangarba, dharma gharba.
But nature of tathanga dangarba,
nature of the, it has a coded zoki teaching,
I mean not just zoki teaching,
in the teaching it has so many qualities.
One aspect of nature is emptiness, as Buddha said.
The outer emptiness, in emptiness,
between emptiness and, I mean all the 16 emptiness teachings mentioned
in the Heart Center which is joined to, to.
No palm, no eye, no nose, no tongue, I mean all that.
From the nirvana, from the...
there is no words, no gaining, no losing, losing.
Those all, emptiness aspect one,
Buddha highlight of that emptiness aspect,
and emptiness aspect.
Why Buddha said that, highlight that, call it.
Because our notion of the duality is so strong,
we're clinging, we're grasping, we are always clinging,
holding something.
That clinging is not nature.
That is obstacle.
To remove that obstacle, to release that hindrance,
then Buddha highlight of this,
the Pandya Paramada teaching,
Pandya Paramada teaching,
that which 100,000 stands the Pandya Paramada teaching,
highlight that, that.
But then, not just the Buddha left there,
then explaining on the third 20 world of dharma,
tathanga dangarba, that's what we're talking.
That tathanga dangarba teaching,
then explain, and what in the teachings said,
the great Mahatma Mahatma said,
that teaching is highlighting of the,
the call it of the tathanga dangarba teaching.
It's not just empty, empty,
but it has all the call it is.
On another world, it has all the richness call it is.
Richness call it is.
Every richness, and that explain here,
then is in the continuing we go tomorrow now,
to the here explaining.
The five Gaya's, and the five wisdom's,
the five that all is within the dharma Gaya states.
All the five wisdom's, five Gaya's,
and power, and ability, understand everything
within the dharma Gaya state.
In that dharma Gaya or that tathanga dangarba state,
everything.
And that means what? For us.
We all have, for that reason,
we all have the Buddha, right in the heart, mind.
In the Dzokhi teaching, often mentioned,
youthful West body.
Right in our heart center,
this dathanga dangarba is recited,
fully developed enlightenment.
In the teachings said, said, really,
it's fully developed enlightenment.
It's nothing have to add anything.
Nothing have to subtract anything.
And for that reason, there's a few moves,
sutra or tandara teaching, go to ji lama said,
as it is, at well be is it is.
Never going to change, never going to utter net ends.
Nature, quality, remain exactly as it is.
That is nature.
But why we don't, for that reason also,
I mean, in the end the teacher,
I'm sure you heard, and I heard that's what I'm talking.
Talking in the teaching said,
all living beings are Buddha.
All living beings are Buddha.
That's clearly said.
But why they're not, but now, why we're not,
then why we're sentient beings?
Because they're obscured.
That Buddha is obscured.
They're misty, dark clothes, clothes, the garden.
Otherwise, Buddha right here.
And what is dark clothes?
Our negative emotion is dark clothes
that one's own creations.
Nobody else created in our Lord to us.
His one's own creature is dark clothes.
It's covered.
Reality is here.
In this famous tandara called takwani bah,
tani dantara, in that teaching said,
and everyone is, all,
in the Tibetan world,
all these living beings are Buddha,
but they're obscured.
And for those reasons, in the Gohanga,
not the Gohanga, but in Jilama,
and Otara dantara,
Otara dantara is a famous suttara teaching
by the great master,
the great upcoming future Buddha,
Maitre, Maitre, Maitre said,
there's nine different, or ten different examples
how our Buddha nature is covered up.
Ten different examples that covered.
Otherwise, it is right here, really.
Right here. Right here.
And those are the leading teaching.
And so this now, the first one is explained,
really about the call it,
emptiness aspect of the call it is,
and they were going to change
by any means to any time that emptiness.
And then, and now, next one is explained
of the clarity, richness call it,
of the, of the, of the tatangata garbas.
Akhore Doki Tiki,
his first one is explaining
about the highlight of Dharmakaya nature,
of the emptiness aspect of nature of the mind.
And then, then, next one is explained
of clarity aspect of that.
And that, yeah, that is explaining.
And so, that is really my talk today.
And thank you very much.
Everyone for body space.
Thank you.
Here we do short meditation,
and then we dedicate the marriage.
Thank you.
(Coughs)
Dedicate the marriage, short dedication,
and the page, according to this page,
180, 80 page.
(Singing in Hindi)
By this parent, may all obtain your ambitions.
May I defeat the enemy in wrongdoing,
from the stormy waves of earth,
full age, sickness, and death,
from the ocean of samsara,
may I free all beings.
May the soul source benefit in happiness.
The Buddha's teachings remain for a long time.
May the victory banner of the lives of the noble ones,
the holders of the teachings remain firm.
May all the temples and monasteries,
all the readings and recitations of Dharma flourish.
May the sangha always be in harmony.
May our aspirations be achieved.
May all beings always be joyful.
May all births into the lower ground cease forever.
May the wishes of all the Buddhists suffer,
and all the beings swiftly reach fruition.
At this very moment, for the peoples and nations of the earth,
may not even the names, disease, famine, war,
and suffering be heard, but rather may pure conduct,
merit, wealth, and prosperity increase,
and may supreme good fortune and well-being always arise.
The precious bodhicitta, in those without it, may be generated,
in those who have it, may it never diminish,
but always continue increasing.
May the great tradition of the Kempo Shankarakshita,
Loba, Vama, Sambha, and Dharma King, Trisa and Detsen,
increase and spread throughout the three-round world.
May the appearance of the three jewels
and mind-streams of beings remain inseparable
and bring sublime well-being throughout the three times.
Deity, mantra, and Dharma Kaya
are the nature of appearance, sound, and awareness.
The pervasive Kaya and wisdom display of the Buddhas
may practitioners of the profound and secret great perfection
remain inseparable from the innermost,
one-case awareness of wisdom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK. Thank you, everyone.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much, everyone.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much for participating.
Dashi Delhi. Thank you very much.
And also, I thought to really encourage all of us to do
that this one, we're trying to do as much as we can do practices.
In the Nyungma teaching, in a particular great temple,
Kanyipati, you all pretty mentioned that to us.
And I remember that all the time.
Nyungma school, always combined together,
studying and meditation together, studying.
So in this case, for example, one week we're doing practices,
but also we're doing studying in the morning,
kind of together as much as we can learn
and the studying of the teaching,
particularly connected to the zokin, zokin on the inner tandana.
And the apranong, then we put that in the practices.
So in a way, so I'm trying to come also really participate
in those morning activities and as well as apranong activities.
And I want you all to encourage.
So please also participate in our apranong practices too.
It's really combined. Apranong is the practices really.
Morning is starting in a way, kind of a little learning.
Learning and also at least we're reminding to our knowledge
what we already learned, something, some durgidad.
In an apranong really we practice.
And then it's called the union of the studying
and the practice togit.
In the teaching of apranong meditation,
mostly important is really in the Buddha teaching practices, so important.
Study is important because why?
You have to know what are your practices.
And once you know that, then practice means observing
that teaching into the heart, heart,
and not left on the brain or the intellectual levels.
Intellectual level living, the realization won't come.
And for those reasons, in the great masters,
great learned scholars have to do practices.
For example, Eun-Chin-Bam.
He's really one of the greatest scholars in all time.
But that is not enough.
He left through the mountains
and went to the teacher in the practice.
That's in it a bit. In India, often there are so many great masters,
those six ornaments of Buddhism, really.
Because they learn, they're so great scholars.
They're so intellectuals.
Not just believers, they're really intellectuals.
Thinkers, so famous thinkers, so genuine thinkers.
But then, that's not enough to get something realization.
Then went meditating, practices in Naropa tree.
And it was one of the great scholars in the teaching field.
But that's not enough.
Being a scholar, practices is the most important.
Realization comes from the practices.
For example, Mohan Ambuji, he's a big scholar, naturally.
He's not just went to academic schools in so many years and all that.
But because he's a genius, really.
Manjushri came as human poems, you know.
No, but then in our life story, when we read,
and we heard so many stories from the order,
always on the mountain, always on the hermitage,
practicing meditating, that.
So this, and then as well as the false, great chinti,
false, great kungro.
In their life story, how much they practice meditating.
They know all the things.
But practice is so important.
So therefore, of course, when we're busy, we're doing something,
then that's a really great thing we need to do.
So that was definitely.
But if you don't have to do, not too urgent, all these things,
it's definitely practice.
I think they're really wonderful.
And I just like to encourage you to practice.
We'll talk it, OK?
Thank you.
Thank you very much, everyone.
I mean, welcome, welcome, everyone.
Thank you so much, everyone.
Thank you.